---
title: 📖 Notes as structures of knowledge
enableToc: false
---

Whether understood as materializations of memory or the process of situated thought itself, notes do not stand alone: They are always in relation to other thoughts, ideas, and observations. These relationships are always shaped by power, meaning that feminist note-taking must go beyond the contemporary emphasis on note contents to consider the broader system which places notes in context with each other and structures their retrieval.

For example, Institutions such as museums, libraries, and archives use organizing tools and techniques such as collections, databases, lists, maps, catalogues, and indexes all contribute the meaning of their written contents. Archives do not simply document the past: They actively shape the construction of the past—of cultural memory—by the way they store and present different forms of information ([Schwartz & Cook, 2002](References/Schwartz%20&%20Cook,%202002.md)). The placement of one record next to another offers evidence of a shared context and begins to piece together a story which is as much formed by what is present, where, as what is not present at all. Rather than offering a guide to finding pearls of meaning, the organization of this information is part of the very production of such knowledge—be it within the fonds of an archive or the Documents folder on a personal computer.[^1]

As an alternative to taken-for-granted folder structures, [Ahrens (2017)](References/Ahrens,%202017.md) emphasizes the need for notes to relate to each other for them to be useful. This is not a new concept: Historical studies of early modern European scribal practices emphasize the role of organization over content, turning to indexes, topic-specific notebooks, and even cabinets of keyword slips as solutions to finding information amongst the vastness of one's notes (see [Blair (2010)](References/Blair,%202010.md) and [Soll, 2010](References/Soll,%202010.md)). In comparison, however, most contemporary literature on note-taking takes their organization as a given, perhaps due to the reliance of computers on deep folder structures and the availability of keyword searches, tagging, and flexible file ordering. This organization tools are undoubtably useful for note organization. Still, the lack of attention to the need to clearly connect notes prevents cross-fertilization of ideas between subjects, disciplines, sources, and moments.

[Ahrens (2017)](References/Ahrens,%202017.md) points to the note-taking methods of 1950s German sociologist Niklas Luhmann as a source of inspiration for his own note organization system. Luhmann kept what he called a zettelkasten, a slip box full of index cards where he wrote all of his notes. Rather than organizing these cards by topic or source, Luhmann would organize them by a series of numbers, letters, slashes, and commas which referred to their position within the larger system ([Ahrens, 2017](References/Ahrens,%202017.md)). For example, a note which fell under a broader topic labelled with the number 42 might be labelled as 42/1a and place directly underneath it in the slip box. A second note directly related to 42/1a may be listed as 42/1b and added to the slip box following it. By allowing his notes' labels to be endlessly expansive, Luhmann could organize them contextually and always knew their location within his ever-expanding information system. Further, since these labels did not shift as new notes were added to the system, he could also reference existing notes in different areas of the system, creating a web of knowledge which Ahrens describes as resembling an analog version of the hyperlinked internet.

The similar affordances between Luhmann's note organization system and the internet has brought a number of efforts to replicate his system using digital means. In fact, an entire online community has emerged surrounding networked note-taking today, although academic literature has yet to recognize their contributions. Loosely organized under the broader term "PKM" or Personal Knowledge Management, there are [YouTube channels](https://www.youtube.com/c/BryanJenksTech) ([Jenks, nd](References/Jenks,%20nd.md)), [forums](https://www.reddit.com/r/PKMS/) ([r PKMS, nd](References/r%20PKMS,%20nd.md)), and [blogs](https://pkmjournal.com) ([Dubois, nd](References/Dubois,%20nd.md)) dedicated to developing and maintaining networked note-taking systems like Luhmann's. In these spaces, professionals, students, and academics exchange methodological principles for note-taking, experiment with new note-taking software, and often contribute the creation of such software, which are often free and open source. The PKM community is rich for its experimentation and openness to sharing knowledge and software, and I owe much of my thinking on networked note structures to the many individuals contributing to digital note-taking methods and methodologies. 

In its emphasis on note-taking strategies, however, PKM tends to focus on individual productivity as the ultimate measure of a note-taking system rather than any consideration of the types of knowledge these systems might help produce. For example, the fact that Luhmann wrote over 50 books and over 500 journal articles in his 30-year career using his note-taking system ([Ahrens, 2017](References/Ahrens,%202017.md)) is often cited in PKM spaces, but there are few if any discussions about Luhmann's qualitative contributions to his field. The tendency for PKM to glorify productivity via technological means echoes the way digital technologies are largely shaped by neoliberal narratives which treat the internet as a space of profound egalitarianism, despite the dependency of contemporary communications infrastructure on global racial capitalism ([Noble, 2016](References/Noble,%202016.md)). While the free and open source software developed by members of the PKM community is helpful for many, little has been theorized about who and what these systems can be useful *for* outside of a general appeal for neoliberal productivity.

This is not to say that there is no opportunity for feminist interventions into media technologies. Describing how database organization is critical to the access and distribution as well as autonomy and privacy of the information it contains, [McKinney (2020)](References/McKinney,%202020.md) outlines a history of feminist "information activism": 

 > 
 > This concept brings together people, their visions of justice, and the media they use to organize, store, and provide access to information, a relationship that is key to understanding feminism’s role in histories of commonplace technologies such as computer databases. (p. 2)

Inspired by this history, I see an opportunity to bring a vision of social justice to the networked note organization strategies emerging from PKM. These strategies offer alternatives to the critiques launched against folders and files, bringing notes out of artificially imposed hierarchies and into an always-relational network to bridge disciplines and integrate situated knowledges in a variety of media forms. 

[^1]: For more on the social construction of files, see [Vismann's (2008)](References/Vismann,%202008.md) investigation into the co-construction of files and the law and [Gitelman's (2014)](References/Gitelman,%202014.md) media history of documents.

# 

 > 
 > [👈 Notes as constructions of knowledge](📖4%20Notes%20as%20constructions%20of%20knowledge.md) | [Four principles of a feminist note-taking methodology 👉](📖6%20Four%20principles%20of%20a%20feminist%20note-taking%20methodology.md)
